hello fellow didgeridoo scholars! I am working on a didgeridoo physics brain teaser and wanted to ask your opinion about my thoughts. Sorry in advance for the long text. I want to build a "singer" didgeridoo. These have a very strong overtone (the singer) which is so loud that the didge sounds like two notes (fundamental and singer) at the same time. This effect is achieved by two properties of the didge: 1st) it has a resonant peak in the impedance spektrum at the frequency of the singer. And 2nd) this frequency has a maximum in the soundwave at the end of the Didgeridoo. Frank Geipel explains it on his homepage in more detail: https://www.didgeridoo-physik.de/didge-physics/singer/
To construct a didge like this I had these thoughts. I would love to hear your feedback and find out if these thoughts are valid or if I made a mistake.
1) My fundamental note should be a D. I would like to build a Didge with 2 singing tones, tuned in F# and A, so the didge plays a major chord of D, F# and A.
2) I painted the chart attached to this post. It shows the amplitudes of the sound waves of the fundamental and the A and F# overtones, as a function of the distance in the didge from the mouth piece. So e.g. I calculated that the 4th overtone (F# at 367.08 Hz) has a wavelenght of 934.04mm. I guess that all overtones have amplitude 0 at the mouth piece.
3) From the plot I can see maxima. For example, at 1462mm, the overtones 5th and 9th overtone (A, red line and F#, purple line) meet. So if I build a didge with this length, I already have the 2nd property of the singer didge.
4) I have another method to compute a didge with impedance peaks at these two overtones. So if I compute a shape with these impedance peaks and the length 1462mm, it should be a singer. Right?
5) In the chart I can choose many different maxima. I guess I will get louder singer notes from lower overtones compared to higher overtones, because of the damping. And I think that louder is better in this case.
6) I think that the didge has to be a bit shorter than I calculate from the chart. Because the sound waves reflect a bit outside of the Didge and therefore, the maximum has to be a bit further outside the bell end. But how far? I heard or read somewhere that the waves get reflected at the point 1/3 of the diameter of the bell after the bell end. So if the Didge from example 3 has a bell of 90mm, than the Didge must have length 1432mm.
7) From the chart I can choose between many singing overtones. The singers should be as loud as possible and therefore I prefer lower overtones over higher overtones, because lower overtones get less damping.
I hope it is somehow understandable what I am up to. I am happy to hear if you have any feedback on this 🙂